Cave run and welcome back in this video
discuss the basics on how to obtain Moss
from local sources and how to propagate
it for prolonged abuse in terrariums and
pavilions this is the general care guide
that outlines techniques suitable for
various types of Moss these are the
techniques that I personally use and
have found to be extremely effective as
you well now I almost always use moss
and my terrarium and pavilion builds
propagating your on Moss is extremely
easy to do and it's very useful
especially if you create as many
projects as I do even if you don't
create very frequently it's still wise
to propagate your own Moss this remain
benefits include convenience safety and
success did you know that there are over
10,000 species of moss it's true and
although they are found in base
conditions most can acclimate quite well
and thrive in very moist environments
luckily for us that's exactly the type
of environment found in a terrarium or
vivarium that said when propagating Moss
one of the most important factors to
consider is moisture Moz will grow very
quick and dense one provided enough
water however if you don't provide
enough it will quickly dry out and in
many cases die for good if you can get
this down
you will become a green thumb in no time
before we can do anything though we need
to get some moss you can find moss
pretty much anywhere you can order it
online gather from the forest find it in
your yard or you can pick it from the
cracks of the sidewalk I'm an
opportunist a gatherer and have been
known to grab a patch of moss wherever
and whenever I see it just keep your
eyes peeled and you'll notice it just
about anywhere today I'm gathering
various types of moss from the woods
behind my house I've extensively
explored these woods so I know exactly
where certain types of moss grow one
harvest thing I never completely removed
any patches mom I do this so that I can
continually return to the same spots and
of course that I don't deplete the
resources completely think of it as
sustainable harvesting a good way to do
this is to grab some moss from the
middle of a patch and then fluff the
moss over the void that was just created
it's like nothing was ever removed
or simply take a little bit from the
edges like so there's moss everywhere so
no need to be greedy with a single patch
now that we have some moss we can take
it home and get it prepared to the next
step first and foremost we're going to
need a container and some form of
purified water generally I use tap water
treated with drops like these rep tight
safe drops you could also use reverse
osmosis water spring water distilled
water or rainwater to name a few
fill up your container with a decent
amount of water then submerge your moss
and let it soak the reason that we are
doing this is to remove any debris and
as many hitchhikers as we possibly can
soaking the moss will also rehydrate it
if it's little on the dry side
anyway set this container aside and let
the moss soak while we do the next few
steps so the next part we need a tight
seal in container anything that will
hold humidity and has a transparent lid
will work fine I used to use aquariums
with the plastic lid but I fished a
Tupperware containers for convenience I
got this twenty quart Tupperware
container for about six dollars so the
cost is really cheap and you could
always reuse it for something else later
on now that we have a suitable container
we can move on to our drainage layer
which I usually refer to as a false
bottom here I simply have some gravel
but you can use various materials to
make your false bottom regardless of
what you use you don't need very much of
it this layer will mostly help
perpetuate the water cycle but it will
also keep the substrate from getting too
soggy from exposure to water about a
half an inch of your drainage element
should be sufficient
[Music]
afterward we need something to keep the
substrate separate from the false bottom
add some carbon fiber glass window
screen which is what I typically use
there are a lot of materials that you
could use for this part and here's a
little list that I compiled for you
regardless of what you use as a mesh
barrier we have to cut it to size as I
stated in past videos when you cut mesh
for your projects you should cut it
slightly larger than the size of the
bottom of your container I'll show you
why in just a second also I like to cut
my mesh using an exacto knife you could
use scissors as well once your mesh is
cut simply place it in your container so
that the excess goes up the sides this
will prevent any substrate from sneaking
down in between the mesh and the side of
the container now we have to add a
purification element this will help keep
the water as clean as possible when it
passes down into the false bottom it
also helps prevent mold buildup which is
always a possibility in an enclosed
environment like this your best option
you see that activated carbon or
landfill charcoal I suggest using
non-food charcoal because it's really
cheap by volume if you only need a
little bit than activated carbon might
be your best bet put in a thick layer of
your purification element this enclosure
will main very moist at all times
so we need to ensure that the
environment is as fresh as possible and
this layer will do exactly that
next we can add the substrate layer I
prefer to use my typical tropical
substrate mix because it remains fluffy
even in very moist conditions follow the
link to learn more about it however it
doesn't matter what type of substrate
you use generic potting soil like this
or even dirt from outside will work as
well if you start from outside I highly
recommend sterilizing it before use you
can do so by baking at 350 degrees for
about 15 minutes in the oven
additionally if your intent is to use
these mosses for variable house animals
definitely do not use dirt from outside
anyways put it in when your substrate
into your container it doesn't need to
be very thick since most mosses simply
grow on top of the substrate
[Music]
once your substrate is in place lightly
mist it to even off the surface and to
keep it from sticking to the moss later
on now we can return to our moss as you
can see the water is extremely murky and
has a lot of particles floating around I
doubt that yours will get this dirty as
most of it came from the sphagnum moss
regardless this should illustrate why
it's a good idea to clean the moss in
the first place
now get another container full of clean
water and transfer the moss into this
one if you notice any debris as you
transfer the moss be sure to remove what
you can keep repeating this process
until the water remains pretty clean
when you transfer the moss from
container to container as stated earlier
the whole point of this process is to
remove as much foreign materials as
possible even though this is pretty
effective at removing most pests
it doesn't effectively remove microbes
that said if your intent is these moths
obtained from outside and of the vein
with animals do so your own discretion
personally I've never had anything
adverse happen but the potential is
there in regards to this I thought it -
rules of thumb I always keep my mosses
for a few months before adding them to
set up intended for animals also I only
use moths from outside and newly
established tanks before adding the
animals rather than adding it later on
these steps won't guarantee that nothing
will happen but any precaution that can
be taken should also if you're simply
using your mods for a terrarium you
don't have to be concerned with anything
in fact you don't need to sterilize your
moss in the first place but it's never a
bad idea
once your Mons is good to go simply
place it in your container you don't
need to bury it in the substrate or
anything like that I prefer to keep my
mosses and patches based on the type you
can also break a larger piece of moss
into smaller sections to promote faster
growth
[Music]
what's your mosses in place give your
container thorough misting
I should also mention that if you want
to add any sort of micro fauna such as
spring tales or isopods you can do so as
well now I will briefly go for lighting
Moss isn't very picky
it grows in bright light or in low light
I've used various CFL bulbs a nine and a
half watt LED bulb which is equivalent
to 40 watts and this 15 watt t3 light
fixture however at this point I strictly
use LED bulbs they seem to work the best
are more efficient and create minimal
heat you can set your lights directly on
top of the container but I suggest
parking it slightly above the container
like so I have my lights on a 10 hour on
and 14 off light cycle any alteration to
the cycle shouldn't make much of a
difference last thing that we'll cover
is water after you initially water your
enclosure you should only have to water
the moss about once a month these
containers hold moisture extremely well
simply monitor the moss and if it looks
like you could be drying out add a
little bit of water the August time you
should have to spray a lot of water is
initially every other time after that
you can spray a little bit all the
muscles that you saw me use or temperate
however they acclimate to the
environment of the terrarium and
prevailing without dying back quite
nicely the only type that I don't have
the best luck with is pillar moss
it will do great initially and then kind
of die off I don't think that this type
of environment is suitable for a
long-term
anyways that about sums up this
demonstration as you can see this
process is really quite simple I hope
that you learned something useful from
this demonstration and as always thank
you for watching